O'Reed was a white man, a minister, I think, of the
Unitarian Church, and he was beaten over the head
by some redneck,
and very seriously injured. Well, instead of
going to the local medical maternity, and he
probably could have been saved now, whether he
would have had all his faculties or not, I don't
know. But they drove him to Birmingham without any
medical attention. He was dead. Brain dead. No, he
was a white man. But he was there with the blacks on
the march. And that was one tragic situation that
might have been avoided in part. I don't know
whether he could have been saved or not, but the
people were there willing to work with the blacks.
They were white doctors. This cousin of mine was
one of them. He was a thoracic surgeon. He was
standing by, hoping that there could be some use.
And then the other person on the march, Violet
Louza, I think she was a woman from Detroit, a white
woman too. It's funny that the two who were killed
were white. And she was shot, and I think she was
killed.
because
she was
sitting by some sort of away thing with some
blacks, and a white woman with blacks. This is an
unpardonable sin, and this other red man. But
there were things that, I don't know, it seems as if
a great deal of what happened was for the purpose
confrontation uh for instance martin luther king
and i admire martin luther king a great deal i
disagree with a lot of his methods of that time but
you see what he was doing and i and i saw this and
understood this was affirming non-violence but
confronting in order to incite violence, you see,
against the innocents. And, of course, by that
means, you get a great deal of support. This was
Gandhi's technique, and this has been the classic
technique through the years. And he was a master at
it. But, for instance, he would say, if Congress or
the President doesn't do such and such things,
there's going to be violence in the streets. Well,
partly as a result of his statements, there would
be violence in Israel. And I think the riots and so
forth took place when he was assassinating an
outcry in this same block.
But he knew what he was doing. What you saw wasn't
always what was there. And this was the thing about
Martin Luther King, that I had some reservations.
As I say, I admired a great many things.
I knew him. I've been in meetings with him and
spoken to him on a number of occasions. And he
became the great symbol. This was the important
thing. He became the great symbol to the black
people. And maybe on the basis of what was
achieved, this was the way it had to be done. I mean,
of course, he was an educated person. He had great
intelligence and so forth. And he stayed with the
Black Idiot. He never left it in his manner of
speaking and so forth. Though he could very well
have done it if he chose to. He chose to remain a part
of that community and to Personally, to me, I think
he really saw assassination,
in a sense. So he could become a great symbol. Like
that. Or like Kraus. This was his conscious
purpose. He saw his role in history. And he
certainly has had a tremendous role in history.
And a very constructive and positive role. But it
was on the basis
of inciting violence against himself
as well. And while I was in the midst of all this, I
couldn't help it. I don't know, maybe this is why it
happened. And specifically, as a result, in the
Civil rights actions of, let's see, the 65, the 66,
and Johnson's administration, Martin Luther
King, and those who worked in this vein made that
possible. For instance, the
letter from the Birmingham jail, and the riots in
Birmingham, And
then,
of course, when he was assassinated,
the senseless riots took place everywhere in
Washington and other places. But I don't know what
the final answer to something like this is. This is
history, and this is the way things have been
accomplished. But you see, we're getting the
reaction to this politically, because The
people
in the South and otherwise, like Reagan, who, of
course Reagan considers himself not to be a racist
in any sense, the practical result of a great many
of his policies is to reverse the civil rights and
the human rights of the nation.
We are paying the price
now, I think,
of some of the excesses of that time, even if it's
simply to make oneself an object of ours, of those
who are proud of ours. As goodness knows, we still
have plenty of land in this country with the
freedom to bear arms about
some of the other traditionalist traditions we
have in this country in terms of violence. If King
and that vein had not come in, how would you see the
state of the South at the present time? I think
probably there would have been less legislative
progress and probably more personal progress.
There would be fewer statutes on the books that
have been pretty largely reversed. And there may
have been more progress in terms of human
relationships in the Senate. You think that that
by putting in that lava that polarized. In some
sense it did. I think it was necessary in any event.
But history goes in cycles, and we seem to have been
pushed back to the other side of the cycle, setting
the progress of the 60s. Well,
starting
in the fifties was pretty important, so they moved
on through the sixties and into the seventies. I
became pretty disillusioned with a lot of, well, I
guess you would
say with the radical sheep that came over in the
late sixties and the seventies. Of course,
Vietnam was a lot of this,
and Martin Luther King moved on to Vietnam in
question. I couldn't go with a lot of this, of
course, like everybody else. I wish we had never
gotten it brought in such a situation, and
something had to be done on a confrontational
level. to
halt this finally with halted but boy we sure left a
residue of bitterness civil rights revolution
things that happened in the Vietnam period we are a
polarized society even in the church today that
polarization on
the basis of ideology. It's so overwhelming. You
can't get around it to be concerned about
humanitarian things and the churches. Most of my
writing in this book is dealing with this issue.
and how the church actually functions in terms of
Christian ethics and social action, and so forth.
And I've taken my cue from Bonhoeffer's
statement. The first task of Christian ethics is
to invalidate
the knowledge of good and evil. To invalidate the
knowledge of good and evil. Of course, what he was
talking about tendency of the people in the
churches to prescribe ethically. And this is what
has happened with the fundamentalists today and
their borrowed majority and so forth. But this is
exactly what the liberals were doing in the last
generation in prescribing morality for
everybody else. It's a form of pharisaism.
whether
it's from a conservative or a liberal stance. But I
think the Christian Church can find a way of
dealing with social issues without this kind of
ethical restriction. But at any rate, this is a
question I want to explore for all of you. It's been
fascinating to me because I've been on two sides of
a lot of different issues. Of course, a lot. We
think in stereotypes today. This whole business
of literally stereotyping
is a stereotype. But you're automatically lumped
with certain people.
which I've seen so much of Texas A&M lately,
despite the fact that they've been putting up with
the intersection. So again, students, one of our,
well, it appears that the administration has been
working in like that. One of the vice presidents in
our student body was put on probationary
suspension because he was, had voted in the
Student Senate for the approval of this
organization on the campus.
And he had had like 20 parking tickets. And he had
probationary suspension because of his tickets.
So he made himself vulnerable there, didn't he?
Well, he had paid the tickets, though. Anyway, he
took it to court. To the federal court, the same
judge
that had put in an injunction or something
against the University
of Florida's action against the school. And
eventually they sent him out of court, and I guess
his father is on the back of it. His tenure is kind of
outspoken out there. It's an interesting battle
down there, I think.
at A&M of all places to fight over that issue with
its masculine image of the core and so forth. They
won't let the gals play in the band. Well,
everything around the campus, like even there's a
statue in some of our student meetings of a man and a
woman at Kennedy because it's preparing for the
future. The man is just a massive size less than the
women, and it's so fatiguing. That's the
traditional A&M image of men and women, huh? Yeah.
The statue's still there, so this is... Well, we
have a lot of traditions to live down, and we're
making some that all have to be lived down to, I
guess. Do you see, um, have you been following
South African poems lately, too? Do you see any
similarities?
In fact, it's a reminder, so often, of the way
things were
in our own Southland. But of course, it's
magnified many times now, because, um, the
opportunities
have been only for the blacks. There's never been a
question before about, well, they've had to keep
the black in his place, because the numbers are so
overwhelming, and yet they had to have the blacks
to do the work and bring them into the cities and so
forth, and they had these separate There
was a
very close relationship. Segregation began at
only at certain levels.
Going
to school, or choosing a wife, or dating, and that
kind of thing. And then there were two distinct
groups. But as far as the personal aspects,
all the blacks were primarily serving positions.
Still, they had a role. acceptable,
or most of them seem to accept it, but of course that
kind of situation can't be maintained. But there
is real segregation, and I'll tell you that
somehow. I just don't see any solution, short of
revolution. When revolution comes, there's no
answer. I'm
not optimistic
about what could happen. With the liberalization
of the policies of the whites, maybe that could
stave it off for a while. But eventually, it's on
its own. Just as it was in the 18th century and in
other places. in
a black state home. Which is a terrible thing to
happen. That's a mystery. What happened to your
father after that time? What does he end up doing?
Well, he in
private
farms. Actually, it's a lot of story to it, apart
from that particular issue.
But during the Depression, the bank failures and
so forth, we had a pretty rugged time. We lost
everything we had. When I was young, we were pretty
affluent. By the time I got to high school and off to
college, I was on my own. And
my dad eventually
came back, and so today he was a classic case, and it
involved blacks again. He had been so identified
with the black community, both in Little Rock and
El Dorado, There were no black lawyers in those
days, at least not in Arkansas. But this was a
rather interesting case, and this one case that
provided some financial security for his own
name, for his and others' own name. The suit was
lost in the lower court. It had to do with the
inheritance of a slave, or at least a freed slave,
who owned some property and oil was discovered on
that property. And the question, the legal
question, was who were the valid heirs of this
Edward? And there were about three sets of heirs.
who were claiming that there was a legitimate
marriage, a marriage that was on file. This was one
group of children. And then there was another
earlier marriage, and my father was representing
these heirs. And what he was able to do, from
documents and otherwise, was to demonstrate that
it was a valid marriage in slave terms. They had
jumped the boom. And he argued this. He got into it
after it was lost to the court, but they won it
through the Supreme Court, the Arkansas Supreme
Court. He wrote a nine-page brief and zeroed in on
one point as well. This he always impressed, as far
as legal matters are concerned. Don't go all over
the waterfront. Find your valid point and stick
with it, and let all the rest slough off. But in
these other briefs of hundreds of pages, he wrote a
nine-page brief on one for this group of heirs, and
he got a look out of this to find some
security for his old age. And I still have on file
that brief, which was sort of a classic, I think,
that it convinced
the Arkansas Supreme Court. But that issued it.
later
on, he didn't
get into politics. He was influential in backing
others. For instance, you know, I mentioned this
Tom McRae, who was president of the Rockefeller
Foundation, my nephew. Tom is about 6'7", a great
big tall gang of Arkansas guy. He's a lawyer, too.
But the way Tom McRae came into being, there was an
old congressman who had retired after 25 years in
Southwestern District of Arkansas. And my dad and
two or three others in the little office, this was
in the early 20s, were looking for somebody who
could be honest running for governor. And if they
could find the right man, they would support him,
they would raise funds for him. But Arkansas
politics had gotten rid of the sands of corruption
and everything else. And so they zeroed in on this
Congressman Gray, who had retired from Congress.
And I guess he was in his sixties at that time. He
wanted them to settle down and live in Prescott,
Arkansas. So, Dad and another
man went down to talk to Congress. They hadn't
known him, they were just knowing about
reputation. They asked him to run for governor and
support him. At first, they were confused. They
were an old gentleman who wanted to retire. But
finally, When all the evidence
of the corruption came in, it was like, oh, they
went back again. Well, he won. He ran. He won. He
served two terms. And that's supposed to be a sort
of golden age of Arkansas politics, because when
McRae was governor. Well, close friendship
developed with the families, and my grandmother,
who was living with us in town, and old Mrs. McRae
became great friends. I remember that, oh, when I
was a child, I must have been a good boy or
something, because My grandmother, on a couple of
occasions, took me to call the governor's wife,
took me with her. I guess I just sat there as a good
boy. But I remember the governor's limousine
coming around, picking up my grandmother,
and going to visit Mrs. McRae. And that kind of
thing. Well, when my grandmother was dying, we
lived in Alreda at that time, the oldest grave. and
she was driven by a grandson of hers, Carlton. And
at that time, my older sister was walking in the
camp or something like that. She didn't meet him,
but years later, Carlton came down the road. He was
a chemist working in the laboratory, flying oil.
And they were saying, well, when you go down there,
they'd be sure to look up that Rogers girl. And he
kind of put them out there. He said he would. It took
him a year to get around it. But then things moved
pretty fast. So my oldest sister married the old
governor's grandson. And their oldest son is
Thomas C. McRae IV. And that's the time when But
that was the kind of
involvement in politics that he needed to learn
much, and he was too identified as a nigger logger.
This was a phrase
I heard used too many times. I don't know. He
accepted
it and became kind of a badge of honor. But the idea
behind it was that, I mean, the deprecating idea
was that any lawyer who was
low enough to defend niggers, you know what I'm
saying, was something a little wrong. That's the
way things were. Well, Faubus was sort of a
throwback.
Faubus, when he was coming along, was a very
different person. what he was later. You know, he
went to that, what was it, the Commonwealth
College that was supposed to be a communist
institution, you know? Not that he was a
communist, but a boy from the backwoods who liked
boggles. He'd go to college where he could,
ambitious, backwoods boy. But all of us tried a
power play. I don't know if he
was really ever sympathetic to the
segregationists, but he wouldn't do that. And
Asim Kaur, in
those areas, and refused to send in the troops to
protect those kids in Central High. No one called
us and took advantage of it. There's a background
on it. He calls it the power of the country. So I'll
make you later to see what we do. because
it was a lot of trouble that was caused. Well,
others were vindicated and opposed. It's real
interesting. The Arkansas political scene now is
very different.
one of the things in
the family that my nephew has often been expected
to do. His mother, my sister, and
others in the family were expected that he would
want to go, because he still hasn't met the man that
he still remembered at the start. And Tom has never
really, he has, worked with somebody. He was,
incidentally, he was the governor's
administrative assistant. Bumpers. For a long
time, of course,
Bumpers was in the Senate. And he got a lot of solid
experience
in that situation. But we never really desire to
run for governor. Before he dies, maybe. Maybe
he'll be persuaded like his great-grandfather.
I think he's gotten a lot of publicity out of it.
What the Rockefeller Foundation has done is to
identify causes
that need to be pursued. And then to pour money into
studies, to get professionals who can really deal
with those things. And every time one of his major
studies has come out, for instance,
they did one of the public schools in Arkansas.
Really, this thing in Texas was modeled after, or
at least something of the same thing. And they made
some, the foundation report made some
very strong recommendations about public
schools in Arkansas,
on the caliber of teachers. One of the things I
noticed in the paper recently, they're doing,
they're testing teachers, and a lot of the
teachers are protesting this. A lot of the
teachers couldn't pass the tests that the
students are required to do. Of course, the
unfortunate thing about this is it hits
a lot of black people's situations. There is still
an
inequality there, an inequality achieved as far
as objective tests are concerned. And this is a
real concern, and I think the report The
Rockefeller
Foundation put out about it, suggesting making
judgments about the black
experience and so forth. There'd be a different
kind of test or something. The way it's come out,
they've all been tested the same way. This is
inherently unfair. and a lot of the teachers. Of
course, right now, the issue is not so much on the
black flag
issue, but just another concern of the teachers.
That's a strong concern in my school, especially
because of that stereotype of the people that are
in the education majors being literate at all at
our school. put down as far as, you know, if you're
talking about an age group, they might still go to
art school. I'm concerned that those things could
be in as far as, you know, education especially.
I don't know. I guess it just goes down. You've got
the ethnic and being in business or engineering
or something. Well,
of course, this is North Texas' tradition. This
is, at one time, North Texas State Teachers
College, and our normal school, even before then.
And the large school of education has to fight
this, because they're trying to upgrade the
standards. They're
not high in the school of education. This is one of
the problems. They're leaving some of the
selectivity. They're not just a black community,
but a white community as well. Education courses
seem to be more passable than content courses. It
creates a problem.
When the students here were getting involved in
the news here in the 60s, did they participate in
sit-ins and demonstrations and things like that?
Was there a SNCC, Student Nonviolent Learning
Community? I don't think there was a SNCC on this
campus, but of course there have been a lot of other
places. But no, there was, I don't know that it
ever,
the town capitulated pretty fast that first year.
There were a lot of problems. For instance, blacks
who would
commute in from Dallas,
where would they eat? And we, at our student
center, we had a sort of a lunch place where people
could come in and bring their sack lunches. Most
were blacks, but they didn't have anywhere else to
go. And that kind of thing. Well, that lasted all of
the
confrontations
and things in the community lasted longer than
that. People just hadn't gotten used to that. The
threat and the boycott of the campus theater by
some of the students took care of that situation
really well. Because, you know, there was strong
sympathy among the white students. You know,
there's those two theaters on the square. Was one
of those originally for blacks? No, no, no, no. The
blacks had to go up and down. It was segregated.
That was it. It wasn't too separate. No, no. I think
in Bryan there's one. I guess in Bryan there's an
old theater where there's a back door where they
went in and bought the tickets. Yeah, I remember
that from childhood. Yeah. Of
course, theaters wouldn't turn away the black
trade, but they'd just paint them with side
entrants or back entrants and sit up, I doubt, in
some other place. But those things are no more.
Thank you. I think I've said enough.
All
right.